\documentclass{../sftex/sftex}

\usepackage{algorithm, algorithmic, listings, parskip}

\newcommand{\binwds}[1]{\{0, 1\}^{#1}}
\renewcommand{\algorithmiccomment}[1]{\hfill $\triangleright$ #1}

\title{Power analysis of a hardware accelerated AES implementation}
\author{Gustavo Zambonin, Marcello Klingelfus}
\email{\{gustavo.zambonin,marcello.klingelfus\}@grad.ufsc.br}
\src{https://github.com/zambonin/epos-aes-docs}
\uniclass{Operating Systems II}
\classcode{UFSC-INE5424}

\begin{document}

\maketitle

\section{Motivation}

Devices in the Internet of Things are expected to interact with other machinery
in diverse situations. As such, threats to these communications should be
reduced or nullified altogether by means of protecting the hardware or software
from revealing critical information. However, these features may need expensive
calculations or precise timing. Hence, reduced energy consumption and increased
performance goals need careful consideration.

A \emph{cryptographic accelerator} can be used to help with these constraints,
operating in a more efficient way, by means of calculating steps of a
cryptographic algorithm on the hardware itself. Yet, using these features
requires a deep understanding of the processor used, and may not be available
or enabled on a given operating system.

We also point that these implementations can be attacked non-invasively through
power analysis, \emph{i.e.} measuring power consumption and checking for
patterns in which secret data may be revealed. Ergo, \emph{constant-time}
algorithm implementations can be employed to prevent this undesired behaviour.
While these are usually very complex to implement, it is still useful to know
if current implementations using accelerators are prone to leak important data.

\section{Goals}

The underlying system-on-chip (SoC) powering EPOSMote III, called CC2538, is
derived from the ARM Cortex-M3 blueprint. It features hardware accelerators for
AES and RSA ciphers, and the SHA256 cryptographic hash
function~\cite{Texas:report:2013:may}. Poly1305, an AES-based message
authentication code, is used inside EPOS to achieve data authenticity and
integrity, as seen in~\cite{Resner:inproc:2015:feb}. Hence, it is desirable to
\emph{optimise the current implementation for the AES cipher}, making use of
the cryptographic cores available directly from the processor, as well as
\emph{profile its power usage} within a low-footprint, simplified EPOS
instance.

Optionally, it is beneficial to apply techniques to harden the code and making
it resilient to power analysis, as well as measure how deeply one may control
the hardware accelerated cryptographic directives, \emph{i.e.} if there are
only ``black-boxes'' available or separate steps for each cipher, since one can
more finely analyse the power consumption for these separate operations. An
example of this study can be seen in~\cite{Schwabe:inproc:2016:aug}.

\section{Methodology}

To reach our goal, we will first need to study and fully understand the AES
cipher in the context of CC2538, \emph{i.e.} how the cryptographic hardware
provided by EPOSMote III's SoC works. We will then implement a driver that uses
the hardware accelerated features for AES inside EPOS\@. Afterwards, its
correctness will be tested, and its performance measured against the previous
implementations. Finally, we will analyse its power consumption by means of
reducing the underlying operating system's noise with regards to background
tasks, modifying it accordingly (\emph{e.g.} replacing system components by
simpler alternatives, such as the thread scheduler).

\section{Tasks}

\begin{enumerate}
  \item Elaborate a detailed project plan;
  \item Demonstrate the project's viability;
  \item Implement a driver based on the cryptographic accelerator for AES on
  EPOS\@;
  \item Benchmark the previous AES implementation inside EPOS against code
  using hardware accelerated routines;
  \item Reduce the operating system footprint and measure the power profile for
  the hardware accelerated implementation;
  \item Compare all implementations and display practical results.
\end{enumerate}

\section{Deliverables}

\begin{enumerate}
  \item Project plan (this document);
  \item Report consisting of a simple demonstration of technological viability;
  \item Code that talks to the AES cryptographic accelerator through EPOS\@;
  \item Report with performance comparison between software and hardware AES
  implementations on EPOS\@;
  \item Report on power analysis, observed through an oscilloscope, for the new
  driver implementation;
  \item Project demonstration.
\end{enumerate}

\section{Schedule}

\begin{table}[htbp]
  \centering
  \begin{tabular}{lccccccccc}
    \textbf{Task}           & \textbf{30/04} & \textbf{07/05} & \textbf{14/05}
        & \textbf{21/05} & \textbf{28/05} & \textbf{04/06}
        & \textbf{11/06} & \textbf{18/06} & \textbf{25/06} \\
    Task 1 --- Project plan   & E1             &                &
        &                &                &
        &                &                &                \\
    Task 2 --- Viability      & E1             &                &
        &                &                &
        &                &                &                \\
    Task 3 --- AES driver     & x              & x              & E2
        &                &                &
        &                &                &                \\
    Task 4 --- Benchmarks     &                &                & x
        & x              & E3             &
        &                &                &                \\
    Task 5 --- Power analysis &                &                & x
        & x              & x              & x
        & E4             &                &                \\
    Task 6 --- Demonstration  &                &                &
        &                &                &
        & x              & x              & E5             \\
  \end{tabular}
\end{table}

\section{E1 --- Basic concepts and technological viability}

We start by explaining the concepts related to cryptography needed to
understand the body of this work. Namely, we talk about cryptographic hash
functions, message authentication codes (MACs), the AES cipher, an example of
MAC called Poly1305, and power analysis. Afterwards, we show preliminary
results on the EPOSMote III platform and EPOS that allow us to demonstrate the
technological viability of this project.

\subsection{AES --- Advanced Encryption Standard}

AES is a block cipher that operates with key sizes of 128, 192 and 256 bits on
a state matrix of $4 \times 4$ words. The words are polynomials of a Galois
field with order 256, chosen for its easy computational representation and
solid mathematical basis. It is an iterative cipher, featuring repeated
applications (rounds) of four basic operations on the state matrix.

Consider the following pseudocode for the encryption algorithm. Denote $n$ as
the size of key, $\ell = \frac{n}{32}$, $n_r$ as the number of rounds ($n_r =
10$ if $n = 128$, $n_r = 12$ if $n = 192$, $n_r = 14$ if $n = 256$) and $A$ as
the state matrix.

\begin{algorithm}
  \begin{algorithmic}
    \REQUIRE{}  $m \in \binwds{128}, \enspace
      K \in \cup_{n \in \{128, 192, 256\}} \binwds{n}$
      \COMMENT{plaintext and key}
        \ENSURE{}  $c \in \binwds{128}$ \COMMENT{ciphertext}

    \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow m$
    \STATE{}  $\{k_{0} \dots k_{(n_{r} + 1) \cdot \ell}\}
      \leftarrow \textsc{KeyExpansion}(K)$
    \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{AddRoundKey}(A,
      \{k_{0}, \dots, k_{\ell - 1}\})$

    \FOR{$i \leftarrow 1$ at√© $n_{r} - 1$}
      \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{SubBytes}(A)$
      \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{ShiftRows}(A)$
      \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{MixColumns}(A)$
      \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{AddRoundKey}(A,
        \{k_{i \cdot \ell}, \dots, k_{(i + 1) \cdot \ell - 1}\})$
    \ENDFOR{}

    \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{SubBytes}(A)$
    \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{ShiftRows}(A)$
    \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{AddRoundKey}(A,
      \{k_{n_{r} \cdot \ell}, \dots, k_{(n_{r} + 1) \cdot \ell - 1}\})$

    \STATE{}  $c \leftarrow A$
  \end{algorithmic}
  \caption{AES ciphering process.}
\end{algorithm}

We briefly discuss the routines mentioned above and refer
to~\cite{Daemen:book:2002} for detailed explanations.

\begin{itemize}
  \item \textsc{SubBytes}: substitute every element of $A$ for its
      corresponding value inside a substitution-box (S-box, built from the
        multiplicative inverse of elements in the Galois field along with an
        affine transformation), with the intent of concealing the relationship
        between key and ciphertext;
  \item \textsc{ShiftRows}: shift every row of $A$ by a fixed amount, with the
      intent of scattering the values of the state matrix, avoiding the
        independent encryption of columns;
  \item \textsc{MixColumns}: multiply every column of $A$ by a specific
      polynomial and apply modular reduction, achieving further diffusion;
  \item \textsc{AddRoundKey}: combine $A$ with the round key through an
      exclusive or operation;
  \item \textsc{KeyExpansion}: derives a set of words from the key so these can
      be used in every round, through the use of efficient and non-linear byte
        operation, preventing localization of patterns that can reveal the
        master key.
\end{itemize}

AES is an example of symmetric cryptography, \emph{i.e.} it uses a single key
for encryption and decryption. Hence, the routines above need to be easily
inverted, but only with the master key. We present the pseudocode for the
decryption algorithm and discuss the new routines.

\begin{algorithm}
  \begin{algorithmic}
    \REQUIRE{}  $c \in \binwds{128}, \enspace
      K \in \cup_{n \in \{128, 192, 256\}} \binwds{n}$
      \COMMENT{ciphertext and key}
    \ENSURE{}  $m \in \binwds{128}$ \COMMENT{plaintext}

    \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow c$
    \STATE{}  $\{k_{0} \dots k_{(n_{r} + 1) \cdot \ell}\}
      \leftarrow \textsc{KeyExpansion}(K)$
    \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{AddRoundKey}(A,
      \{k_{n_{r} \cdot \ell}, \dots, k_{(n_{r} + 1) \cdot \ell - 1}\})$

    \FOR{$i \leftarrow n_{r} - 1$ at√© $1$}
      \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{InvShiftRows}(A)$
      \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{InvSubBytes}(A)$
      \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{AddRoundKey}(A,
        \{k_{i \cdot \ell}, \dots, k_{(i + 1) \cdot \ell - 1}\})$
      \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{InvMixColumns}(A)$
    \ENDFOR{}

    \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{InvShiftRows}(A)$
    \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{InvSubBytes}(A)$
    \STATE{}  $A \leftarrow \textsc{AddRoundKey}(A,
      \{k_{0}, \dots, k_{\ell - 1}\})$

    \STATE{}  $m \leftarrow A$
  \end{algorithmic}
  \caption{AES deciphering process.}\label{alg:aesdecrypt}
\end{algorithm}

\begin{itemize}
  \item \textsc{InvShiftRows}: shift every row of $A$ by a fixed amount,
      inverting the correspondent diffusion on the encryption algorithm;
  \item \textsc{InvSubBytes}: substitute every element of $A$ by its
      corresponding element on the inverse S-box (obtained by applying the
        inverse of the affine transformation and then taking the multiplicative
        inverse in the Galois field);
  \item \textsc{InvMixColumns}: multiply every columns of $A$ by a specific
      polynomial (the multiplicative inverse of the polynomial for the
        corresponding step).
\end{itemize}

\subsection{Cryptographic hash function}

Consider two sets, $X$ and $Y$, with words of length $m$ and $n$ respectively,
such that $m > n$. A function $H : X \longrightarrow Y$ can be defined as a
hash (or compressing) function, since elements of $Y$ are generally called
hashes or digests. $H$ is defined to be deterministic and computationally
efficient. To consider $H$ as cryptographic, other restrictions are taken into
account:

\begin{itemize}
  \item Preimage resistance, \emph{i.e.} the function cannot be inverted
      efficiently;
  \item Second preimage resistance, \emph{i.e.} given $m_0 \in X$, it should
      not be computationally feasible to find a different $m_1 \in X$ such that
        their hashes are equal;
  \item Collision resistance, \emph{i.e.} it should not be computationally
      feasible to find any two distinct messages in X with equal hashes;
  \item Presence of the avalanche effect, wherein a single bit change on the
      input should change approximately half of the bits on the output.
\end{itemize}

Note that collision resistance implies second preimage resistance. In the
former, an attacker may choose any two messages from $X$, whereas in the latter
one message is fixed and cannot be changed. Hence, it is said that second
preimage resistance is much stronger as a security requirement.

\subsection{Message authentication code}

To create a message that has not only integrity, but also authenticity
(\emph{i.e.} one can verify if it really came from a specified sender), a MAC
construction has to be employed. It authenticates a message by signing it with
a symmetric key. Consequently, there must be a way for two (or more) entities
to agree on a key. It follows that, if a key is shared between multiple devices
(\emph{e.g.} a sensor network), every device that can verify a MAC can also
generate other MACs. It consists of three algorithms that can be computed
efficiently:

\begin{itemize}
  \item Key generation, where on input of a security parameter $n$ (usually a
      large enough integer), a random key is produced from a key space
        (\emph{e.g.} the set of all binary words of length $n$);
  \item Signature generation, where on input of a key and any message, it
      produces a tag (a short name for an authenticated message);
  \item Signature verification, where on input of a tag and a key, it returns a
      Boolean value on whether the tag was created with that key.
\end{itemize}

Note that this construction should be able to resist forgeries, that is, it
should be computationally unfeasible to guess the MAC for messages that were
created with an unknown key. We give an example of MAC algorithm in the form of
Poly1305-AES and refer to the original paper for detailed
explanations~\cite{Bernstein:inproc:2005:feb}. It is sufficient to know that
Poly1305 is a polynomial evaluation modulo $2^{130} - 5$, with the following
parameters: a secret key with two values (the key for AES and a random integer
with special properties), an unique number (nonce) to be encrypted using AES,
and the message to be tagged. The underlying security of the algorithm is based
on the nonce encryption mechanism. Observe that AES may be replaced at any time
by another cipher.

\subsection{Power analysis}

A cryptographic algorithm is not only required to present a solid mathematical
proof, but also implementations that can resist side-channel attacks. Secret
information may be retrieved if it can be finely measured and physically
exploited. Cache and timing attacks, introduction of faults by placing the
device under extreme conditions, acoustic and electromagnetic monitoring etc.
are various forms of side-channel attacks. We focus on the concept of power
analysis, in which the power consumption may be studied to obtain sensitive
data from a given device, and further restrict our scope to simple power
analysis, where one can directly measure and visualize the power consumption
collected from cryptographic operations.

Consider the example of a RSA cipher, that works with multiplications and
squaring modulo prime numbers. These can be distinguished by looking at the
measurements through a standard digital oscilloscope. Statistical analysis of
the values and removal of background electrical noise may be required to
enhance the observation results.

\subsection{Results}

We now introduce these concepts to the EPOS environment. First, to ensure that
a meaningful test bench is used to test the new driver implementation, we
created an application out of the \verb!src/component/poly1305_test.cc! file
and executed it to ensure the software implementations for the algorithms work
correctly, getting positive results and a meaningful execution time. A simple
task to prove the viability for the driver implementation is to actually
manipulate the cryptographic core. Hence, many definitions in the form of
memory addresses for registers and function prototypes had to be migrated to
EPOS, from the \href{http://www.ti.com/tool/CC2538-SW}{official driver library}
provided by Texas Instruments. We created a dependency graph of the files from
that library, starting by
\verb!cc2538_foundation_firmware_1_0_1_0/driverlib/.../aes_example.c!. We found
out that hardly any files are needed, namely (folder names omitted for
clarity):

\begin{itemize}
  \item source files are \verb!aes.c! (AES driver), \verb!cpu.c! (instruction
      wrappers), \verb!interrupt.c! (driver for the NVIC --- Nested Vectored
        Interrupt Controller) and \verb!sys_ctrl.c! (driver for the system
        controller);
  \item header files are, in addition to corresponding files for each source
      above, \verb!hw_aes.h!, \verb!hw_flash_ctrl.h!, \verb!hw_nvic.h!,
        \verb!hw_sys_ctrl.h! (addresses and constants for registers that manage
        the AES driver, flash ROM, NVIC and system controller, respectively),
        \verb!hw_ints.h! (defines for types of interruptions) and
        \verb!hw_types.h! (common types and macros for hardware access).
\end{itemize}

Hence, we moved these files to the EPOS codebase and adapted them
accordingly to compile a test application. We present an application that
manages to enable the AES core, and discuss the code in detail.

\begin{lstlisting}[language=C++,numbers=none]
  #include <utility/aes-hw/aes.h>
  #include <utility/aes-hw/hw/hw_sys_ctrl.h>
  #include <utility/ostream.h>

  using namespace EPOS;
  OStream cout;

  typedef struct {
    unsigned char ui8AESKey[16];            // stores the Aes Key
    unsigned char ui8AESKeyLocation;        // location in Key RAM
    unsigned char ui8AESBuf[16];            // input buffer
    unsigned char ui8AESExpectedOutput[16]; // expected results
    unsigned char ui8IntEnable;             // set to true to enable interrupts
  } tAESExample;

  tAESExample sAESexample[] = {
      {{0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00,
        0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00},
       0,
       {0x6c, 0x5f, 0x51, 0x74, 0x53, 0x53, 0x77, 0x5a, 0x5a, 0x5f, 0x57, 0x58,
        0x55, 0x53, 0x06, 0x0f},
       {0x83, 0x78, 0x10, 0x60, 0x0e, 0x13, 0x93, 0x9b, 0x27, 0xe0, 0xd7, 0xe4,
        0x58, 0xf0, 0xa9, 0xd1},
       false},
  };

  int main() {
    // enable AES peripheral
    HWREG(SYS_CTRL_RCGCSEC) = 0x00000010;

    // mimic start of aes.cc@AESLoadKey
    unsigned char *pui8Key = sAESexample[0].ui8AESKey;
    static unsigned int ui32temp[4];
    unsigned char *pui8temp = (unsigned char *)ui32temp;
    unsigned char i;

    // key address needs to be 4 byte aligned
    for (i = 0; i < KEY_BLENGTH; i++) {
      pui8temp[i] = pui8Key[i];
    }

    // configure master control module
    // enable DMA path to the key store module
    HWREG(AES_CTRL_ALG_SEL) = 0x00000001;

    // clear any outstanding events
    HWREG(AES_CTRL_INT_CLR) = 0x00000001;

    // configure key store module (area, size)
    // 128-bit key size
    HWREG(AES_KEY_STORE_SIZE) = 0x00000001;

    // enable keys to write (e.g. Key 0)
    HWREG(AES_KEY_STORE_WRITE_AREA) = 0x00000001;

    // configure DMAC
    // enable DMA channel 0
    HWREG(AES_DMAC_CH0_CTRL) = 0x000000001;

    // base address of the key in ext. memory
    cout << hex << "AES_DMAC_CH0_EXTADDR before writing: "
      << HWREG(AES_DMAC_CH0_EXTADDR) << endl;
    HWREG(AES_DMAC_CH0_EXTADDR) = (unsigned int)pui8temp;
    cout << hex << "AES_DMAC_CH0_EXTADDR after writing: "
      << HWREG(AES_DMAC_CH0_EXTADDR) << endl;

    // total key length in bytes (e.g. 16 for 1 x 128-bit key)
    HWREG(AES_DMAC_CH0_DMALENGTH) = 0x10;

    return 0;
  }
\end{lstlisting}

This implementation follows the directives in~\cite[Sec.
22.2.5.4.2.1]{Texas:report:2013:may} and can actually write the base key
address to the \verb!AES_DMAC_CH0_EXTADDR! register, with value
\verb!0x20000050!. The module is enabled by setting the second bit of the
\verb!SYS_CTRL_RCGCSEC! register, as per~\cite[Sec. 7.7.12, pp.
207]{Texas:report:2013:may}. Afterwards, DMA is enabled, and the module can
already fetch the key from external memory, finally writing it to the key store
(a protected memory region). If the module is disabled, the base key address
will not be written at all. Note that \verb!aes_example.c! features both
interrupt and polling implementations; the interrupt drivers may not be needed
if polling is used exclusively, thus reducing the amount of code needed to
port. Additionally, it showcases only ECB (Electronic Code Book) mode, whereas
other modes can be used, according to~\cite[Sec.
22.2.1.1.3]{Texas:report:2013:may}.

Finally, we briefly discuss how to measure the power consumption through an
oscilloscope. Preliminary discussion showed that an \emph{amplifier circuit} is
needed. One needs to mangle a USB-microUSB cable, acting as power for the
EPOSMote III, to insert a shunt resistor and actually read tension from the
current passing through the cable. Then, since the signal is too weak to be
captured by the scope, one will need an
\href{http://www.ti.com/product/TL074}{operational amplifier}, some resistors
(according to \href{http://epos.lisha.ufsc.br/dl675?display}{this description})
and a protoboard to implement an amplifier circuit. Finally, when the scope is
able to sense it, the measurements can be taken (this circuit design is subject
to changes). One can also disable certain parts of the SoC by making use of the
deep sleep feature~\cite[Sec. 3.5.1, pp. 132]{Texas:report:2013:may}, and
further simplify the application's traits file, to reduce background noise.

\bibliographystyle{alpha}
\bibliography{wiki}

\end{document}
